in this video we will understand about
CMOS inverter transfer characteristics
transfer characteristics is simple it is
output voltage versus the input
voltage but the very first point I want
to make sure that you know all your
basics right because this is the very
important topic the five star rating so
make sure you understand this topic in
depth first you should note about this
circuit of the CMOS we have already
studied in our basics but that was the
ideal condition if you provide the zero
word you are getting the one if you're
providing logic one you are getting this
zero it behaves as the inverter that's
true because it is ideal but practically
it's different your input voltage will
have the different stages different
voltages and you will get the output
voltage as different at every stage that
is very important in the CMOS inverter
transfer characteristics we have to look
whether our p MOS is in which region at
what time of the input if my input is at
the 0 volt would whether my P Mos and n MOS
are in linear saturation or cutoff
region we are interested in that
knowledge okay first point is you should
know that the CMOS is called
complementary Mo's because at the upper
side we have P Mo's lower side we have
the N Mo's so complementary MOSFET we
are using that is the reason it is
called CMOS and the next point you
should note is we have the four voltages
VGs of P VGs of n VDs of P and VDs
of n now these are the four voltages
every voltage have their uniqueness they
are not same they are not same so what
are the uniqueness let us see that VDD
is 5 volt Vss is 0 volt now these are
the upper and the lower voltages VDD and
VSS so they are 5 and 0 volt but VGs
, n is input and VDs ,n is
output so now we will see why VGs
P is equal to minus of VDD minus V input
very important point we have to
understand one thing that VSD is the
standard notation when we write P Mo's
and it is actually Vs minus VG so you
have to check what is the source voltage
for the P Mo's it is equal to VDD and
what is the gate voltage for the P Mo's
it is equal to V input so VSD
is equal to V is a vs minus VG which is
equal to VDD correct and minus V input
we have seen here that we have the VDD
at the upper side and VG is equal to V
input so if you are writing VD VG s that
is the opposite if you are writing Vgs
then it is minus X Vsg so that is the
reason you are getting minus of VDD
minus V input similarly you can find it
for VDS,P if you go for the
standard notation it is Vsd Vsd is Vs
minus VD so what is the source voltage
it is VDD and what is the drain voltage
for the PMO's it is output so basically Vs
vs minus Vd is actually it is VDD minus
V out but you are writing in the format
of VDS, P then it would be minus of
VDD minus V out so this is the reason
this all the notations you should know
how they came up you should not rectify
this things you should know exact
meaning so I hope all the notations are
clear why Vgs is and because it can be
written as VG minus Vs for the N Mo's
and you can see here when you are
talking about why Vgs, minus V input your
VG value is been V in but your vs value
is ground so Vgs is equal to VG which
is equal to V in so that is the reason
Vgs, N is equal to V input similar
same goes for the Vbs, N and I hope
all the notations are clear up till now
but I want to make one assumption the
threshold voltage I am using VT n is
equal to 1 volt and VT P is minus 1 volt
and if you have take the common
threshold voltage it is more of VT is
equal to 1 now we can understand our
basic idea about the transfer
characteristics for the CMOS inverter so
the case number 1 is your V input is at
this 0 volt if your V input as the 0 but
you will get the V output as 5 volt and
your assumptions was Vtn is a 1 volt if
Vtp is what Vtp is minus 1 would these
are your assumptions now you are
checking in all the conditions you are
checking how my N Mo's and P Mo's are Behaving
you are checking this condition now we
will talk about the N Mo's my Vgs,n would be what from the previous slide
we know that Vgs, n is equal to V
input and we input here is 0 volt and
your 0 volt is less than your threshold
voltage because your threshold voltage
is one volt so if zero volt is less than threshold
volt your input is less than the order
required threshold volt your MOSFET
won't be on if your MOSFET won't be on
it is off this means you are in cutoff
region and your drain current is zero so
first case your n Mo's is in the cutoff
region in the case number one where your
V input is zero and V output is five
volt but what about the P Mo's we are
we want to see the condition of P Mo's
as well so in which region your P MOS is
working let us find that Vgs, P is
equal to this condition that is - time
VDD minus V input you do the calculation
you know every value VDD is 5 input is 0
after the calculation you will get minus
5 volt similarly you can find it for VT
P VTP is given its it's simple VTP is
given that is minus 1 good so you have
Vgs, p + VTP you have to check
the condition so Vgs , P is less
than VTP but in the P MOS style you have
to say that VSG which is 5 volt is
greater than 1 volt so you should know
this style because here you can say your
transistor is on because your input is
greater than your threshold this is the
correct style okay and you can say this
this style is useful for calculation
purposes but this style is important for
the conceptual purpose to find whether
your region is in linear saturation or
cutoff so here your MOSFET is on if your
MOSFET is on your next task is to ask
yourself if your MOSFET is on whether it
is linear or saturation region now we
will find that to find that you have to
check your driver voltage and your VDS
always we did that we have found the
driver voltage and the VDS we check the
condition greater or less and then we
come at turn on the answer similar thing
you are doing VDS ,P is this
equation substitute the values Vdd
you know 5 volt V output is 5 volt you
will get the answer as zero volt
similarly you have to find the driver
voltage which is VGs ,P - Vtp
or you can say Vsg and you should do
VSD - Vtp then also you will
get the answer do anyway you will get
the answer is minus 4 volt and once you
get the answer as minus 4 volt you have
to check in this sense of the N MOSFET
if you are going for the N mos style you
will get this because it was easy for
the calculation purpose but if you want
to go for the knowledge and conceptual
purpose you should check this condition
which is VSD ,p and Vsg of p
minus mod Vtp so this is the conception
where you know if it is less it is
linear but if you are going for the
calculation style your
style would be opposite if it is greater
because you are choosing the N Mos
style so if it is greater it is the
linear region and I have covered this in
my basics I have already said you how
you can deal either you go for the
calculation style that is the inverse
style then you are you have to consider
your conditions opposite so this is this
style one and this style number two is you
go for the P mos style and if you going
for the P mos style everything remains
same as you studied for the N Mo's so
this is style 2  - I always prefer style 2
- because conceptually it is easy but
for the calculation purpose as you can
see the step 1 and step 2
I followed the N mos style to go for
the P mos style what you have to do you
have to change your Vds to VSD simple
you have to change your driver voltage
so if it's the driver voltage of the N
mos I'll change it to driver voltage of
P mos style which will have the minus
sign present so change the sign if you
have minus 4 it would be plus 4 for the
PMO's fashion and 4 volt you have to
check that zero is less than the 4 volt
yes and it is the linear region so in
the case one we have studied that when
my input is zero my n MOS is in cutoff
region and my P Mo's is a linear region
now I will increase my input voltage so
you can see that V input is similar to
or greater than 1 volt then my output
will be let's say similar to 5 or it
should be something less than 5 so this
is my case and I want to check now my n
Mo's and P Mo's will be in which region
so it would be interesting
let us see first the N Mo's so VT s
,n is equal to V input so you can
say that VG s ,n is greater than
equal to 1 volt similarly we have the
threshold for the N mos as 1 volt you
can say that your VG s is greater than
the threshold voltage so your transistor
is on if your transistor is on it can be
linear or saturation so we are checking
whether our n MOS is linear region or
our n MOS is in saturation region so how
we check first we need the VDS and then
we check for the driver voltage so VDS
,n is equal to V output it is
similar to 5 volt or something less than
5 volt so this is our case but our
driver voltage is VG s ,n minus VT
n which can be written as 1 minus 1 and
that is equal to 0 because the values we
always know that Vgs,n we
know that it is input which is similar
to or greater than 1 volt and Vtn
and the value is already we have assumed
that the value is 1 so 1 minus 1 the
answer is 0 so surely 0 is less than 5
what does this means this means that
your driver voltage is less than your Vds
so if VDS is greater than driver
voltage you are in saturation region so
your n MOS is now in saturation region
so this is interesting now we will check
for the P Mo's now we will check whether
our p MOS is a linear cutoff or
saturation region so how to check our first
step is always about whether our MOSFET
is on or off if it is off then you are
in cutoff region but if it is on then
you are in linear or saturation region
so we always follow the two steps and
for the beamers we take a special care
while concluding the answer we follow
the P mos style but while doing the
calculation we follow the n MOS style so
you can see the first step VGs ,P
so this is the n MOS style and Vgs, P according to our equation it is
equal to minus this is VDD minus V input
so the answer is minus 4 volt now you
have to check in the P mos styles so you
are checking your Vsg , p value
which is the plus 4 because vgs was
minus 4 so Vsg
would be minus of minus 4 that is plus 4
and more VTP is 1 so 4 is greater than 1
this means your transistor is on if your
transistor is on it can be linear or
saturation so tell me what is the answer
second point is checking the region so
how to check the region to find the
value of VDS comma P so again it is the
n MOS style of calculation so it is
minus times VDD minus V out you will get
the answer as zero volt now you have to
find the driver voltage which is
VG s comma P minus VTP you cannot here
it is not mod VT P mod Vtp is when
you do the P mos style but this is the
n MOS style you have to write the
negative of the value so you will get VG
s comma P which is minus 4 and VT P is
minus 1 so completely it will make it as
plus 1 so minus 4 plus 1 you will get
the answer as minus 3 volt now what's
next you have to check your driver
voltage and your VDS value if your VDS
value is now you have to check in to
style either you can go for the n MOS
style because you have done the
calculation in n mos style or you can
change this value in the p MOS fashion
and check the P Mo's condition so I will
always prefer for the P Mo's condition
so you can see that VSD comma P this
means I am changing the sign because my
VDS was 0 so VSD would be also 0 because
0 never has its sign now what about the
the driver voltage driver voltage
has minus 3 volt so it will also change
its sign because we are dealing with the
P Mo's so we have to change its sign so
minus 3 volt will be 3 volt now we can
say your 3 volt is greater than 0 volt
this means your video Vsd is less
than driver voltage you can say it is a
linear region so conceptually
conceptually in n Mo's and P Mo's the
condition remains same but you have to
follow this P mos style to make sure
your conditions are seen so this is very
important this I have already covered in
my previous videos why you should you
always have two types this I have
already covered follow the inversion for
only calculation but go for the P Mo's
style by concluding the answer
I have concluded my MOSFET is in linear
region now we will move forward now this
is the case 3 from my input is similar
to greater than one my input is changed
to two point five if my input is two
point five I am getting the output as
two point five so this is the special
case now you have to check whether your
n MOS is in which region and your P
mos is in which region so for the N
Mo's we will follow the same two process
MOSFET on or off and then we will check
for the linear or saturation so first of
your VG s comma n is equal to V input
which is 2.5 volt now your 2.5 volt is
greater than this threshold that is 1
volt this means your transistor is on
now the next task is to check the region
linear or saturation so VDS comma n this
is the V output which is 2.5 the driver
voltage is this and the after doing the
calculation you will get 1.5 volt so 2.5
is greater than 1.5 this means you are
in saturation region so our n MOS is in
saturation region what about P Mo's so
now we will check for P Mo's again we
have to follow the two steps first step
is Vgs comma P that is equal to minus
VDD minus V input and the answer is
minus 2.5
now you have to check your transistor is
on or off in P Mo's so this is the P
Mo's logic for the transistor on what is
that Vsg comma P should be greater than
mod of VTP so already you have vgs to
find vsg change the sign so you will
get 2.5 volt and mod of VTP is mod of
minus 1 so the answer is 1 so yes 2
point 5 is greater than 1 then your
transistor is on if your transistor is
on which is the region let's check the
region so what is the first step VD s
comma P this is equal to minus VDD minus
V out just substitute the values all the
values you have the answer is minus 2.5
driver voltage substitute the value you
will get the answer as minus 1 point 5
to get the condition you should be in
the P MOS fashion now you got VDS find
the value of the
design for minus 2.5 becomes plus 2.5
now you have the value of driver voltage
change its sign because driver voltage
is actually for n MOS you follow this type
for P Mo's it changes its side so minus
1.5 will change its sign to plus 1.5
always do the calculation in n Mo's by dealing with P Mo's what you
have to do change sign change sign
simple logic
you have to follow this you will never
fail in track so 2.5 greater than 1.5 so
your answer is saturation region and
because your VSD is greater than driver
voltage now the case number 4 is
interesting your V input is gradually
increasing so V input is similar to or
greater than 4 whereas your V output is
similar to 1 volt
similar to 1 or less than 1 so what
would be n Mo's and P Mo's in the form
of region saturation region linear
region so you have to find that what you
can do is follow the two steps so Vgs
comma n is V input it is similar to
greater than 4 volt surely or 4 volt is
greater than your threshold value so
transistor is on now you have to note
whether your n MOS is in linear or
saturation region so VD s comma n is
equal to V output which is similar to or
less than 1 volt then you have your
driver voltage as VG s comma n minus VT
and substitute the value for minus 1 the
answer is 3 volt so you can say your VD
s is less than the driver voltage
because 1 is less than 3 and that is the
reason your n MOS is in linear region
now we will deal with P Mo's so VG s
comma P is equal to minus VDD minus V
input you will get the answer as minus 1
volt then Vsg comma P you have to find
that value that means inversion of what
we have done so invert this sign you
will get plus 1 mod VT P is also plus 1
so actually we have done this that it
should be greater than or similar to
minus 1 so this value is greater than or
similar to this correct so basically it
is greater so if it is greater than your
transistor is on you should have your
Vsg that is the input for P Mo's greater
than your threshold voltage then
only your MOSFET would be on so here yes it is
similar to greater this means it is a
greater and your MOSFET is on now check
for the region so to check the region
it's simple what you have to do two
steps VDS comma P and vo p which is v VT
s comma P minus VT P substitute the
values in both the cases minus 4 volt of
VDS comma p 0 volt for driver voltage do
it in the p mos style which means change
the sign
so Vsg comma p the answer is plus
4 volt and change the driver voltage
sign it is again the zero volt so 4 is
greater than zero so answer is
saturation region because your vs g is
greater than the driver voltage so the
last case we have is the case number 5
where the V input is maximum that is 5
volt and the output is super minimum
that is zero volt so let us step for the
N Mo's in which region the n MOS is
working so Vgs comma n is 5 volt Vtn
is 1 volt so 5 volt is greater than 1
your MOSFET is on next step VD s comma n
zero volt driver voltage is 4 volt so 0
volt is less than the 4 volt so it is in
linear region so this is interesting
again you got your n MOS in the linear
region so we will deal with P Mo's now
to deal with P Mo's you should first
find the VG s comma P which is minus VDD
minus V input so the answer is zero volt
but your  Vtp is minus one so your
vgs is zero volt so vs g would be
zero volt again but your VT p is minus 1
volt so more VT p is one volt check
this two
is what zero volt your mod VT p is 1 so
what is the relation the relation is
your vs g comma p is less than mod Vtp
this means your MOSFET is on off
and if your MOSFET is off this means you
are in cutoff region so here in case
number 5 the P mos is in cutoff region
so this is the DC characteristics of the
CMOS inverter y-axis as the output
x-axis has the input and these are the 5
cases when V input is minimum that is
equal to 0 what is similar to 0 volt
then it's similar to one volt then is
similar to 2.5 there is greater than 2
point five  then it is in the fifth case
it was super Maximum that is the 5 volt so
this were the cases we covered I just
wanted to remind you about the cases we
have deal with and we have seen how our
MOSFET works in each case in each case n
Mo's and P Mo's have different working
but only in the case number 3 n Mo's and
P Mo's had the same working that is the
saturation region so here are some
notations this value is Vtn that is the threshold voltage of n Mo's
and here somewhere here you will get the
VT P threshold voltage for the P Mo's
then you have the VI L that is the input
flow voltage input high voltage
somewhere here and you will have the
middle value as VDD by 2 that that's
what we consider in case number 3
similar to 2.5 and then we have this
input high voltage we have this VDD plus
mod of VT P here we have to take the
positive value of the threshold and
lastly we have the VDD my input
is high super high that is VDD then my
output is 0 so this is the curve this
represent is the transfer
characteristics DC characteristics now
we will see what were the regions this
were the regions 1 2 3 4 5 correct and
how ourMOSFET work in this regions so
this is the conclusion in the case
number one where my input is minimum and
my output is maximum that is VDD then my
n Mo's was cutoff region P Mo's was
linear region here when my V input is
similar to greater than 1 then my V
output is less than 5 volt then my n MOS
is in saturation P MOS is in linear when
we input and we output as same that is
2.5 the answer was saturation saturation
and fourth condition when my V input is
greater and V output becomes less that
is V input is greater than 2.5 and V
output is less than similar to 1 then my
answer is n MOS is in linear p MOS is in
saturation and at very large when my V
input is maximum 5 volt then my output
is minimum that is
so you can say your n mos is in linear
region and P Mos is in cutoff region
all the calculation we have seen so I
hope you had the brief idea about CMOS
inverter DC characteristics and this are
the some of the points you should know
so that whenever you are dealing with
the drain current you know exactly which
equation to use because if you are now
if you are dealing with the drain
current for N Mo's and the drain current
for P Mo's it won't be same it would be
different at some position let's say
case two you have to use the drain
current for saturation region for the
n mos for the P Mo's it would be
linear region so this are the important
point that is the reason we have studied
the practical working of the CMOS
inverter so practically it will work in
this five condition so this is all about
these CMOS inverter I hope you enjoyed
this video